# Multiple-Sclerosis-RNA-Seq
See Wiki section for information about the project.

# Functionality 
The initial input files were provided by Dr. Chen and made accessible to us on our class server. Each experimental group has three FASTQ files of RNA Seq transcripts.  Kallisto quantification is run using the generated index and the transcript FASTQ files. After that, the three output files produced by Kallisto for each of the experimental groups are read in by Sleuth, and the comparisons: CFA vs. Vehicle, CFA vs. Sephin1, and Vehicle vs. Sephin1 between the groups are done. Within Sleuth, the Wald test function is included to compute the specific beta coefficient of every transcript, which is necessary for WebGestalt. Furthermore, the transcript IDs are converted to gene IDs using Biomart. Next, three tables (for each comparison) are generated with two columns for gene IDs and their beta coefficients. These tables are uploaded to the web-based WebGestalt for gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). GSEA allows for the extraction of biological insight from genes of interest and generates volcano plots and other figures to aid in visualizing their changed pathways. The final output files of our pipeline include a gene list and the plots generated by WebGestalt. 

# Software Requirements
Package installation for Python:
```
import os 
import Bio
from Bio import Entrez
```

Package installation for R:
```
# install.packages("devtools")
# devtools::install_github("pachterlab/sleuth")
library(sleuth)

# install.packages("dplyr")
# package for data manipulation
library(dplyr)

# install.packages("biomaRt")
#a package that provides an interface to BioMart databases (e.g., Ensembl).
library(biomaRt)

# install.packages("ggplot2")
# a powerful package for creating static, interactive, and animated graphics
library(ggplot2)
```
# Scripts
All of the scripts can be found under 'Final_code'. The scripts must be run in the order described below. Information about how to run the scripts, including what packages are necessary, are also found in the script comments. A WebGestalt tutorial is also available under /Final_code/WebGestalt. 

1. Final_Kallisto-Script.py 
   - Used to quantify the transcript levels from the given RNA-Seq reads produced by the three experimental groups
   - Input: 
     - RNA-Seq reads of the translated transcripts
   - Output: 
     - 3 folders for each of the experimental groups
         - one compressed file with all the quantifications and bootstraps, another file with the abundances and counts for each transcript, and the last file with run time information

2. Final_Sleuth-Script.R
   - Used to perform differential gene analysis
   - Input: 
      - Output folders from Kallisto
   - Output: 
      - 3 .rnk files, one for each comparison group (CFA vs Sephin, CFA vs Vehicle and Vehicle vs Sephin)

3. Webgestalt (available at https://www.webgestalt.org)
   - Used for the extraction of biological insight from genes of interest
   - Input: 
      - .rnk file produced from Sleuth
   - Output: 
      - Graphs including Volcano Plots, Bar Charts, and tables including gene list
      
# Input Data 
The data used in this project is Dr. Yanan Chen's unpublished translated transcriptomes, available to Loyola Univeristy Chicago student/staff with access to the Spring 2023 Computational Biology class server. The path to access this data in the class server is found in the Kallisto.py code in the Final_code folder. 

# Output 
The outputs of this project can be downloaded from Webgestalt and Sleuth. 
